Hello and welcome to Factually. I'm Adam Conover. Thank you so much for joining me on the show again.
This week, we're talking once again about climate change. See, a couple weeks ago,
I had Dr. Hannah Ritchie on the show, and she made the case that if you look at all these different
indices, emissions per capita, the price of renewable energy, deforestation, a lot of things are
moving in the right direction, and that that is cause for hope. Now, I expressed some skepticism
about this and a lot of you did as well in the comments below the episode. And that's because,
you know, we have made some progress, but the progress we have made is clearly insufficient.
And even though we've made progress on some solutions that have leveraged the power of
capitalism to say, make one kind of energy cheaper than another, sell electric cars and stuff like
that, well, that's kind of the easy solution, isn't it? To sell clean energy when it's just as cheap
as fossil fuels. But getting people, or God forbid, massive corporations to give up fossil fuels is
hard. So how do we push powerful interest in governments to overlook short-term profit for
the long-term benefits of having a planet that's, you know, habitable? I ask how, because clearly,
we haven't done it yet. Climate change is only partially a problem of technology. Primarily,
it's a social problem that our entire society caused. And it's an open question whether our
collective decision-making institutions are advanced enough to deal with that problem.
I mean, it's much easier to make a cheaper solar cell than it is to get all world governments to
agree to decarbonize, but mass decarbonization is what we actually need, right? So if we want to
look at how society can change, we need to look at more than just technological fixes. We have to
look at the science behind what causes social change in institutional transformation that is a huge
and hard problem. And you can't figure it out just by looking at the atmosphere or brand new
awesome clean technologies. You need to talk to a sociologist. Well, guess what? On the show this
week, we in fact have a sociologist who has written an incredible new book about how we can
actually create the massive social change we need to fight climate change in the face of
corporate opposition to that change. I know you are going to love this interview, but before we
get to it, I just want to remind you that if you want to support this show and all the conversations
we bring you every single week, you can do so on Patreon. Please head to patreon.com slash
Adam Conover. Five bucks a month gets you every episode of the show ad free. We got a bunch of
other great community features. We'd love to see you there. And of course, if you like stand-up comedy
and you want to see me perform in a city near you, head to adamconover.net for my tickets and tour dates.
And now let's get to today's guest. I am so excited to introduce you to Dr. Dana Fisher.
She's a sociologist and she's the director of the Center for Environment, Community and Equity
and a professor in the School of International Service at American University.
She's been following the politics and sociology of climate change for decades,
and her new book is called Saving Ourselves from Climate Shocks to Climate Action. Please welcome
Dr. Dana Fisher. Dana, thank you so much for being on the show. Thank you for having me, Adam.
So we talk about climate change a lot on this show. Normally, I'm talking to climate
scientists, technologists, people like that. You are a sociologist. You have written a book
about the climate crisis. From a social perspective, why is that such an important lens to use?
Well, I mean, at this point, everybody recognizes that the climate crisis is actually a social
problem, right? We created the problem, we society, and the only way to solve it is actually through
us. Society is going to have to solve it. It's not like the planet is going to save itself,
right? We got to do it because we got to fix the problem we created. So sociology makes a lot of
sense as a place to look for that because we study social processes.
Right. We can learn as much as we want about the atmosphere or about clean energy technology,
but if we don't understand the people who are actually going to implement those things or do
something about it, then we're going to be up Chitts Creek, right?
Right. I mean, I think it's worth noting here that there are a lot of natural scientists and
atmospheric scientists who have started talking about policy, have started talking about the
social side because they are social beings, and that's great. But there are those of us who are
trained and have PhD specifically in actually studying the social processes and how they work
and have spent our lives and our careers doing that, and I'm one of them. And so we're, I mean,
I think that we provide a lot of opportunity to think through, based on research, how social
systems work and what will be opening opportunities and what will probably not work.
Great. Well, let's zoom out and start using that lens. A lot of people have a lot of different
stances on climate change. People are techno optimists, whatever. You told me before we started
recording, you would describe yourself as an apocalyptic optimist. I want to know what that
means and how do you frame the problem of climate change like most broadly?
Okay. So I'm an apocalyptic optimist. That means that I believe that we are in trouble and that bad
things are coming and that it is bad. It's getting worse and nothing we've done so far is going to
solve the problem yet. But I am optimistic because while it's bad and it's getting worse,
I believe that we have the capacity to save ourselves and I talked through the book,
how we're going to do that. But it's all going to come from us, right? It is not going to be
like the technology that's going to fall from the sky and everybody's going to be like, oh,
I thought that was going to be bad, but it's okay. It's not going to work that way. It's
rather that it's going to involve struggle and work and we're going to have to all get angry to
do it. With regard to understanding the climate crisis and what it is, I mean, basically,
in the broadest way, it is the fact that the entire world, the entire industrial system,
is run on burning fossil fuels, which is basically having the unintended consequence
of increasing concentration of greenhouse gases. The one that we talk about the most is carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere, which is changing the way that our planet absorbs heat. And also,
that is then having an effect on all sorts of environmental systems and climate systems
and the oceans and the poles and the ice caps, et cetera, and so forth. So everything's changing
thanks to these concentrations that have built up over decades now.
Stopping burning fossil fuels basically means that, I mean, I don't know if this is solar,
but I'm assuming it's not. So all of the electricity that we run our lives, our businesses,
most of our transportation, all that has to change. I mean, carbon comes from a whole bunch
of things. Methane emitted by cows, asses. Yes, exactly. The ruminants, all the ruminants emit
methane. It's just that cows get most of the attention. You know, goats do it too. So there
you have it. Well, if you're in a goat cheese, you know. If you're getting birria tacos, like
you are also emitting methane. So sorry, but please go on. Anyway, so the problem is really
tricky because we have to change the entire system that we are running our economies on,
basically. I mean, there are a couple of countries that have done relatively well because they have
the capacity for clean energy. Some countries like Norway, for example, dammed their rivers early on,
so that 99% of all their electricity is actually coming from clean energy because it's hydropower.
And there were very few people except for indigenous folks who lived up there. So they
were able to do it really easily. We don't have that capacity here in the United States. Most
countries don't have that capacity. Isn't Norway also a huge oil driller? Like, don't they have a
gigantic sovereign wealth fund that comes from oil reserves? They absolutely do. And in fact,
one of the things that's kind of ironic about it is they are using those resources to
incentivize people within the country to switch to electric vehicles, right? But they're still
making money. They're still opening up areas for extraction, but then they're selling the oil to
other countries. Yeah. See, this is a little bit of a tangent, but I went to Norway a couple years ago
and a lovely country. One of those countries where you go and you're like, why can't everything be
like, oh, they got solar panels. They got wind, oh, everything's so nice here. Oh, my, everyone's so
polite. Oh, they got public transportation. Everything's good. And then I'll look around for a
little while. What's funding it? This kind of feels like I'm going to my, like a rich kid's house,
you know? Like, I live, like I'm in a neighborhood, I'm middle class, but oh, come over to my house.
This kid's got a super Nintendo. They got like a fridge with a nice dispenser. What's going on?
Oh, what does his dad's do for a living, right? Like this is, this is wealth that I'm looking at.
And where does the wealth come from? They have a gigantic nationalized oil reserves that they're
selling to other countries. So it's a little bit of like underneath the surface, there is a dark
participation in the same system that we're all a part of. Absolutely. I mean, and what's interesting
is that when folks talk about countries addressing climate change, a lot of them
are talking just about what they're doing within their borders, right? But a lot of countries,
including the United States, has considered basically addressing climate change internally,
but then continuing to self also feels abroad, right? So for example, in the United States,
there's a big push to talk about how we could sell our natural gas to other countries because,
you know, it's cleaner and, you know, and our labor practices are better, which, you know,
may very well be somewhat true, but it really doesn't solve the problem. So anyway, going back
to the question. So the climate crisis is a really tricky one because it basically involves
shifting everything and all the ways that we have industrialized and the ways that we live our lives.
And that's one of the reasons that nothing really has been done in the past 25 years or 30 years
since the climate regime began, which is the international kind of efforts to address climate
change. But I think with regard to techno optimism, the reason I'm no longer a techno
optimist is because I have, you know, I have supported and been excited by a number of different
fads. In fact, I was just had a friend of mine who reached out and was like, oh yeah,
clean hydrogen. Green, or sorry, they're calling it green hydrogen now. Green hydrogen, that's the
answer, right? And the deal is that when I was in college, which was in the 1990s, we went through
a whole period of time where we were like, ooh, hydrogen is going to be the future, right? I mean,
that was a long time ago now. I recognize that. It's just that if we keep counting on technology
that's not here yet, we're running out of time. Hey, so that's five years away that's going to
fix everything. And then you have to have diffusion of the technology. I mean, it's just,
it's not going to solve the problem if you want to save large portions of the world that are
basically, I mean, some of them are already going to be lost, right? Lots of small island states are
going to be lost. Lots of coastal areas are going to be lost. Lots of developing countries are going
to have to shift their populations to areas that are cooler or have the resources because
a lot of folks are becoming, areas are becoming resource scarce because of the climate crisis
in terms of water, in terms of food. And as a result of all of that, we're going to basically
have to think about how we address it. And leaning into this idea that don't worry the
technology is almost here, right, is just extremely dangerous. And it's not just dangerous globally,
but it's dangerous for us here in the United States. I mean, look at Arizona. I mean, look
at some parts of California this past summer and this coming summer is going to be even worse.
Yeah. So you said that nothing has been done or very little has been done for the past few decades.
A number of weeks ago, we had a wonderful guest on named Hannah Richie who wrote a book called
Not the End of the World, a lot of the thesis of the, and by listening to the episode, if you
haven't, it was a wonderful conversation. It's a great conversation. I listened to it yesterday.
Oh, okay, great. So I'd like to put you in dialogue with that because I think it'll be really
interesting. Now, her take is, you know, I think a lot of people feel as I did, you know, I grew up
in the Captain Planet era, we have to save the planet needs to happen. And then, you know, here
I am 25 years later, right? I'm like, we didn't do it. We didn't save the planet. Sure. Things
sure seem to be getting worse. What the fuck, right? And a lot of Hannah's argument is like,
actually, a lot of progress has been made. If we look at these charts and look at these graphs,
we can see a lot of shocking, surprising progress has been made and we need to continue that and
increase it. She's often described by people as a techno optimist. Certainly people were in the
comments of our post on YouTube calling her that. So I'm curious how you engage with that argument.
What do you think that argument gets right? And what do you think it gets wrong with all respect?
Yeah, I mean, so I would just say that, you know, the analysis is legitimate in that it is true that
a number of environmental problems have improved over the years. The problem with climate change,
however, I mean, and climate change is the issue that I have focused basically my whole career
the past 25 years on, is that climate change is a political issue. In fact, it's a social
problem in that we have caused the problem and we, as a society, are going to have to solve it.
And to date, the most valuable measure of success of our efforts to address climate change
would be concentrations of carbon dioxide or other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. And if
you look at every one of those charts, it's like a straight slope. So it's not tapering off. It's
not like flattening at all. No, I mean, there was a blip during COVID and we are back on track
just like we were before. So yes, there has been a lot of efforts. There have been efforts globally
through multiple efforts through treaties. I actually studied a bunch of them. So I mean,
I started out my dissertation was on the Kyoto Protocol, which was like a lifetime ago, which
was one of the efforts to address climate change. It was not successful for a number of reasons.
More recently, we have the Paris Agreement where most countries have not yet met and are not going
to meet their commitments that they made back in 2015, right? Yeah. So the thing about, you know,
the argument is that we, you know, while things are getting better and we are per person maybe
emitting less, we're still emitting more, right? And concentrations of the atmosphere are continuing
to go up. And that is the only thing that the earth cares about, right? The earth doesn't care
about if each person is emitting less. I mean, sure, that's better. But the population is going
up too, right? So I mean, and so for me, you know, I'm looking at the bottom line and I also
am looking at the politics of it, right? The other thing that a lot of people talk about is how we
do have policies, right? We have a policy in place here in the United States now, finally,
after years. And I have studied all of the failed policies before. So I was delighted to be able to
write a paper about a successful policy in the Inflation Reduction Act. But not, you know, still
we continue to emit more greenhouse gases every year and temperatures are going up and we got a
problem. So, you know, there's been going on for decades. They've been having these big conferences
and everyone's optimistic, right? Right afterwards. I remember I did an episode of Adam ruins
everything right after the Paris Agreement. And, you know, we, we covered it as it was covered by
basically everyone at the time. This is the largest step that's ever been taken. It shows
international cooperation on a scale we've never seen before. It's, you know, there's such reason
for optimism, et cetera. Or this is the best reason for optimism that we have. And here we are
sitting here, you know, what, seven years, eight years later, just sort of casually describing it
as, ah, well, you know, none of them are going to meet the targets, right? So what are the
impediments to when all of the people at these conferences and all the people running the most
important countries, US, European countries, China all agree about the problem, right? They're
certainly not ignorant about it. Why is progress not being made? Well, I mean, before we, before
we talk about progress not being made, I just want to say, I mean, one of the things that's
interesting is that so they do, they have these meetings every year and people fly all over the
world to go to them and the participation at these events has exploded over the past few years.
And I mean, this past year, they had this wonderful diagram of all the people who took
private planes in and came in and I mean, including some well-known folks here in the
United States who showed up in their private planes. They didn't even carpool. They just,
they all took their own private planes, showed up and then like, we're like, oh, climate change,
bad. We have to do something about climate change. Yeah. But they're not actually practicing what
they preach. Now, so I just want to make these individuals are so important that, of course,
their travel is worth, you know, it's a little extra carbon, but, you know,
Bill Gates, he's got to be here and there, right? He's got to be, if he doesn't get
from Lisbon to Buenos Aires in whatever, 20 minutes, then people are going to die, right?
I mean, I would just say like, let's just start with carpooling or whatever you call it when
it's air pooling. I don't know what the word is, right? I mean, let's just start that.
You want to hit your ride? Like we're going the same way. We can save gas.
And they can join Taylor, right? I mean, she flies all over. She's flying constantly. I mean,
they're doing a big move around here. You should just have the climate conference
where the Taylor Swift concert is happening, right? That would save a lot of carbon emissions.
I mean, I would just say that, I mean, I also would love it if she would think about maybe
cutting down the pyrotechnics a little. I don't know if you've been to a Taylor Swift concert.
I have kids. I've been to many Taylor Swift concerts.
You're there with like an air quality sensor going like, uh, guys were in the purple, like
she said, don't breathe in, everybody hold your breath now. I mean, but it's also,
you know, it's very consumptive. Let's just put it that way. But okay, going back to your question,
yes, I can remember what your question was. Oh, why is it not working? Is that the question? Okay,
so the reason it's not working is that all of these countries are symbolically gesturing
that they care about climate change. I mean, everybody, everybody cares about climate change
now except for a very small proportion of people in the United States. But that's different from
actually acting on it because acting on it is not easy. Like we talked about before. So to act on
it means basically committing to phase out fossil fuels and fossil fuels are a huge part of economies
of many industrialized nations. We just talked about Norway, the United States number one natural
gas exporter and oil exporter right now. So yay us. But I mean, that means that for us to actually
follow through on commitments to phase out fossil fuels means there's going to be a lot of folks
who have what we call privileged access to resources in the form of access to
fossil fuel resources. They're subsidized, right? So they get subsidized access to our federal lands
to drill and take what they can. They also have privileged access to power. And they get that
because they basically contribute to campaigns. And it's not just Republicans, it's folks across
the aisle who take that money and research shows us that when you take money from the fossil fuel
interest, even if you run on a climate sensitive platform where you say you care about climate
change, you want to do something about climate change, when you're asked to vote, you will vote
with the people who fund you. And so that happens all over the world. But United States is a great
example of it. So there is a very, very strong concentrated interest in maintaining the status
quo. And so fossil fuel interests that run countries, run companies, run our industries,
they are basically pushing back. I mean, I was a contributing author for the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change for the most recent round, the most recent assessment. We call that the IPCC.
And so I actually, I wrote this section on civic activism and engagement for working group three,
which is on mitigation. So that's the folks who are talking about how to reduce the carbon that
goes into the atmosphere. And I was so excited to be asked to do this. This is the first time they
ever asked people to talk about activism and engagement. That's what we individuals and
those people who are not in the government and not in business is what we can do about the problem.
So I was very excited to write that. I wrote this. I contributed like 10 pages.
They took three paragraphs, which is how these things work. But when they go from the contribution
to what ends up going to the countries, what goes to the countries is what's called the
summary for policymakers, where they do, it's like the Cliff Notes version. So my chapter was
over 100 pages long. I think it ended up being like 20 pages maybe. I got two sentences in there.
But countries get to approve what goes in there and they took out all reference to fossil fuels.
Wow. So, I mean, and so because countries, all countries get a say and countries that extract
a lot of oil don't want anybody to know. So this was a summary that was put up by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Yes. And they took out references to fossil fuels
when they were summarizing, which is the part that that's what like Biden, everyone else is
reading. They're reading the summary. They're not reading the full version. Oh, sure. Yeah.
I mean, and so what they did is we had to change it from fossil fuel interests to what are called
vested interests. And the thing is that this was a huge success that vested interest got in. And
so we were supposed to be like, oh, yay, we're so lucky. I mean, so in, if you read the chapter,
you'll see the references to the role of fossil fuel interests play. And it's extremely well
documented. I mean, nobody at this point recognized, like nobody believes that fossil fuels are not
playing a big role in contributing to climate change, if you are honest about understanding
the science, right? Yeah. But you still can't say it. I mean, and also, I mean, look at what
happened at the most recent round of the climate negotiations, there were a bunch of countries
that were pushing to get the countries to agree to phase out fossil fuels, right? And it ended up
like dragging on and on and on and a bunch of petrol states that extract a whole bunch of fossil
fuels pushed back against it. So it ended up being this like mealy mouth, we should think about at
some point, phasing out, you know, maybe fossil fuels, you know, I mean, that was the end. I mean,
and everybody was like, yay, I mean, and all of these, all of these people in policy, all these
people in the media were like, finally, we actually kind of said the quiet part out loud, kind of,
but we still didn't. I mean, that's the thing that's crazy about. And so that's the same thing
with the science is that when you have politics and science combined, the way you do for this,
because this is specifically like a scientific assessment that's designed for the policy
community and is coordinated through the different states, when you do that, and you have a bunch
of countries that are basically controlled by fossil fuel interests, you know, it's not surprising
that we see this kind of tricky situation. But it means, I mean, and the more we know that a systemic
shift away from fossil fuel energy towards renewable clean energy is what is needed,
the more these interests are going to like claw and just try to control the dialogue as much as
they can, so that everyday people don't recognize that when fossil fuel companies give money to
candidates who are running for office, like in this election that we have coming up,
those people, whether or not they say they care about climate change are absolutely not going
to do anything about it. Yeah, because their incentive is not to. But what you're talking about,
what you talked about with three different pieces of that story, is politics, right? Like you,
when you are writing and trying to get the right language into the report, that's part of the
political process, as is fossil fuels companies giving money to candidates, as is entire countries
who are basically bent to the will of the fossil fuel makers. But what do we do about that? Because
a lot of folks when confronted with the existence of politics will just say, oh,
fuck, I can't believe politics got in here. Oh, no, there's people, there's corruption,
there's people giving money. Oh, the people who are giving money to do something do the thing
that they're giving the money to do. Oh, the people who have the most power get to call the shots,
right? But unfortunately, politics is just part of the human condition. Politics simply is,
humans in large groups having to make decisions together. And yeah, and unfortunately, people
with power get more say, and that's just how the fucking world works. And if you want to do something
about it, you have to reckon with the political social system that you live in and figure out how
to bend it to your will to do the thing that needs to be done. So I don't want this to be one of those
episodes where we sit around going, I can't believe the fossil fuel companies are like,
have their finger on the scale, they should stop it because they're not going to.
What do we do about that problem? Well, I mean, I just want to say, though, that what you're just
pointing out here is exactly why we can't just say everything's going to get better if we ignore
politics because that's the way decision making happens. And if you ignore the politics and just
assume technology is going to fix everything, well, then you're just going to be really,
really sad in like 20 years or even less, right? Guess who's going to be in control of the technology,
the people with the political power. And if you didn't ignore politics, or if you didn't pay
attention to politics, then you're allowing those people to continue steering the ship.
100%. So what's going to happen now? Or what do we need to do right now? I mean,
so, I mean, this is what I lay out in the book is that the beginning of the book is all about how
we cannot count on decision makers to do what is needed, even though they recognize the problem
exists. And the reason that that's the case is that we see these interests that have captured
decision making and have this privileged access to resource and power, right?
So, okay, so that's not the case. And at the other side of it, businesses, some of which are
really excited about technological innovation, they're not going to save us either because
many businesses are pushing for a clean energy transition. We have a bunch of other businesses
that are clawing their way into extracting as much as possible fossil fuels as they can because they
know that eventually they're going to have to stop. And so there's this bipolar pressure between
these two. So it's not like we have this monolith of, oh, business is really excited about this
technological innovation because they're not. So given that that's the situation, the place where
we have to go to get hope is from everyday citizens, you and me, and the way that we ourselves are
recognizing how the world is changing, how our lives are changing, and how we have to reclaim
power. And one of the beauties of being an American and being in the United States is we still do
have a democracy, at least for now. And we should be taking advantage of it because a democracy
means that we all have power. We have an imperfect fucked up democracy, but occasionally the will
of the people does win. The will of the people can still win, but it's up to us. And that's,
I mean, that's the whole argument on my book is that as unfair as it seems, because we didn't
really cause the problem and we are trapped in a system that is unfair, but we can still take
power back and that's absolutely what we have to do. And so that's the optimistic part of my
apocalyptic optimism. So how do we do that? Because again, a Captain Planet generation,
right, I grew up with, turn the lights off, buy the better thing, right, maybe feel a little bit
guilty when you fly on a plane or whatever, maybe get a Prius, those sorts of things. I've covered
extensively in my work why that sort of consumer approach to fighting climate changes, at the very
least not going to get us out of the problem all by itself. So yeah, what do we actually do?
So what we need to do at this point is we need to lean into activism and engagement. I mean,
and I talk about the reason why even though all of these individual efforts like you were talking
about can play a role in addressing climate change, given that it's a systemic problem,
that's not enough, right? Because anyway, you're going to turn on the lights and unless you are
completely off the grid or you're in a very small proportion of the United States where
you're on clean energy, you're basically then tapping into the same system, right?
There is a really interesting study that I talk about in the book where some students at MIT
tried to map out carbon consumption of everyday people and they ended up mapping out the carbon
consumption of an unhoused person in Boston, right? So somebody who was homeless, who was
living on the streets, but was also going to shelters, right? And they found this person who
has no like very few earthly belongings, right? And who is living in a shelter actually has the
carbon consumption level of well above most of the developing world, right? Because of the system.
So it is a systemic problem. So this is if you were to divest yourself of every single energy
consuming thing that you have as an American or a Canadian or someone else living in our,
you know, part of the world or our part of the socioeconomic ladder, you literally were living
on the street, you would still not be, you know, able to get your individual level down to
make people elsewhere in the world. Well, you could live in a bunker and go like completely
off the grid, like you can do that. And then you personally will not contribute to the climate
crisis, but the system will continue, right? Yeah, exactly. But I mean, but if you just like,
if you try everything, like for example, we at home, we have electric cars, we have solar panels,
but whenever I go to work, I turn on the lights and my computer runs on the system. And so even
though the electricity at home is clean, yeah, it's not clean everywhere else. You're in control
of like the cloud servers that Apple is using to store your emails and what power they were like,
you're part of a system. Yeah. Yeah. And my Alexa that is tracking everything I said. I didn't even
go there. And every once in a while, she just speaks up and says, I hear that you are interested
in games to play with your children. Can I suggest some? And it's like, shit, no, I don't want you
to suggest. And she's burning fossil fuels every time she listens to you. Well, she at home, she's
burning solar. So at least, so at least I have that. But the servers. Oh, yeah. But when she backs
out, she backs up absolutely with like probably coal. So, you know, the dirtiest of them all.
Anyway, so the question that you asked was about how we take power back. So I was just saying,
so individually, we can't do it alone. We need to work collectively. And one of the beautiful
things about the United States is that we have a really long history of social movements and
activism. So one of the things I do in my book is I basically build off of some of the things that
we learn from the civil rights movement, which is the most studied movement ever in the history of
the world. So we know a lot about it. But basically, what we can do is join collectives and get
engaged in our communities, get engaged in climate activism, climate engagement to help to push for
social change. I mean, one of the things that I think is most important is to push for social
change from our communities up. So we don't just decide, I mean, and this is something that my
students and I are always kind of discussing. I think I've won them over because like in the
semester is in like two weeks, which is that you can't really do this all by just going on TikTok.
And I think a lot of young people and a lot of students learn that the sad hard way with the
decision that the Biden administration made around the Willow project, which is this huge
fossil fuel infrastructure project that has been approved by the administration in Alaska.
And all of these young people went online and went on TikTok. It was this huge mobilization on
TikTok. There was like millions of online signatures onto a petition on change.org.
There was a whole bunch of people posting videos about stopping the Willow project.
But there was no in-person action or there's very little in-person action. And unfortunately,
as a result, or not as a result, but unfortunately, the Willow project moved forward, right? So they're
building that out. And a lot of young people are recognizing, I hope they're recognizing and learning
that you can't just go online and do this, you need to actually work with people. And the best way
to do it is to do it in your community. Well, a lot of people make this argument about online
activism. And I see that myself as well, that people tweet and hope it's going to do something.
But I also recognize that the reason a lot of people resort to that is they do not have other
systems in their lives where they feel like they can express themselves. There isn't a mass movement
organization in their area, or they just feel profoundly alienated from their community. A lot
of folks don't have other outlets. So that's a real problem that people face. How can people get
connected? Especially because I just want to add to this that my own experience following the climate
movement is that we have had attempts at mass movement organizations, those organizations,
I believe 350.org is at the name of one, the Sunrise Movement, which was doing, I think,
incredible work for a couple of years. But in the last couple of years, sort of gone,
where are they? No offense to my Sunrise Movement people, right? There's people out there carrying
the torch. But we have not seen, I mean, a year or two ago, there was a giant climate mass
climate march, I think in multiple cities, barely covered in the press. And so there's been an
attempt to build this mass movement akin to the civil rights movement. And yet, for at least a decade,
and yet it has not really paid off. So why is that? And how can we change that?
You're like, you're like in my sweet spot right now. So thank you very much.
Oh, I'm so happy to set up a guest.
Thank you so much. Okay, so first and foremost, let me just say that this is completely to be
expected. Anybody who remembers the period of the Trump administration, there was this huge
resistance to the Trump administration as policies. Anybody who's interested, I wrote a book called
American Resistance that was all about it. It was a mass mobilization. It was the largest
sustained period where people were in the streets and people were active and engaged,
that we have seen since the civil rights period and the anti-war period. So that was like the 1960s,
1970s, right? So since then, this was like remarkable. Everybody, I mean, the Washington
Post did this survey and they said that like, what was it? One in four people had been to a
protest during the first two years of the Trump administration. And there were multiple types
of protests. It was the women's march. It was the wake of the murder of George Floyd. It was a
bunch of things over a span of years. Yeah, yeah. So it was a span of the whole Trump
administration. So the resistance was amazing. And people were the most civically engaged they
have been in decades, right? But so what happens when a Democrat takes office is frequently we see
the left kind of sitting back. And I actually wrote, I wrote a few, we can take a load off. Oh,
boy, what's on TV? I got to, you know, I finally, I can catch up on my reading. Where's my new,
where's my pageant book reading? Okay, maybe like, I hope so. Reading is good thing. But
so, so it was not surprising. But I mean, and I actually wrote a piece that was like,
the, you know, Biden's success is the death of the resistance and the resistance, the resistance
did die. So you mentioned a couple of different organizations. I mean, 350.org is still around.
They do great work. Sunrise is still around. They do great work. But these groups have a lot less
capacity to mobilize people because the general public on the left, when there's a Democrat in
the White House, they're like, All right, I think we're good. I'm going to take a load off. I'm going
to pay attention to my kids. I'm going to catch up on my Netflix. Maybe they're going to read. I
hope they're going to read. But you know, I think maybe maybe they'll read my book. Maybe that'll
get them back out in the streets. But I mean, so, so that's all to be expected. And that's what I
talk about my book is that we know that, first of all, that activism is cyclical and people are
going to need something that motivates them to get out in the streets and to connect collectively,
especially because most people don't have what we call like organizational infrastructure,
which is connections to organizations that are in their communities that help them get active.
And we know that organizations play a very important role in channeling people's concerns,
their anger, their outrage into action. So we need that. So how does that then happen? And what I
talk about in the book is that it's going to come from the experience of climate shocks.
And I can give you, you know, I can give you some evidence around this is that the largest
climate march that we've seen since Biden took office. So since, you know, in years now was the
March 10 fossil fuels, which happened last fall in New York City. And it was right before the UN
meeting where the secretary general said, you have to actually have some sort of commitment or you're
not allowed to come to my meeting. And so a bunch of countries, I believe the United States even
were not invited. So it was a very interesting. Yeah, it was very interesting. Didn't really do
anything. It's a real Regina George move. Yeah, but he was trying. I mean, he was really trying.
Anyway, so 75,000 people marched in the streets of New York City. And one of the things I do is
I survey protesters. So I went out with a team of researchers, students who were working with me,
and we did what we call like a field approximation of a random sample. So we basically went through
teams throughout the whole crowd and surveyed people to get information on who they were,
why they were there, et cetera, and so forth. You're doing sociology. Yeah, I am a sociologist.
Yes. But this is something, this is like a lens that the climate crisis is not often looked at
through. It is unfortunately the case. I mean, so it is increasingly looked at through a sociological
or social scientific lens. But one of the things that's really unfortunate is that while we know
a whole lot about how the world is warming and how a little bit more carbon in the atmosphere will
affect warming and will affect hurricanes and et cetera and so forth, I mean, always more accuracy
is necessary. We know a heck of a lot less about the people who will respond and what we will do
and how it will matter. And so one of my hills that I'm going to die on is saying that we need
more research funding to support that because social scientists get like pennies on the dollar.
Right. We spend so much money researching the hard sciences. We spend so little on researching
the people who we need to implement what the hard sciences come up with.
Well, I would say it's even worse than that. It's the people who are causing the problem,
as well as the people who are going to have to solve the problem. So we know so little about
that. And that was one of the reasons that when I wrote for the IPCC, the rules of the IPCC are
you need to be able to prove how whatever you're looking at is associated with carbon.
Right. So people march in the streets. Well, how does that affect carbon emissions or decisions
around carbon emissions? And there's not that much research. There's a lot more we need to
know about that. So I mean, it would be really great for me to be able to say, okay, if you go
into a museum and you throw soup on a covering of a painting, it equals this much carbon.
Right. I mean, they want me to be able to say that. I mean, I would love to be able to answer
that. I mean, are you going to have better effects in terms of reducing carbon emissions
if you throw soup on a painting, you glue yourself to a door, or you sit in the middle
of the highway, right? But it's an important question. And how much, I mean, so the reason
that folks are doing that kind of activism, which is a lot of what I talk about in the book,
is because they're trying to get media attention. So it's really like, it's like a boomerang,
right? It's an indirect process. So you do those things, you're going to be in the media.
And a bunch of people are going to say, he sucks for doing it. And then other people are going to
say, but he has a point. I should join a movement. And so they will very rarely be like, I'm going
to throw soup. No, they're going to say, I'm going to go work with like a more, you know,
a more benign, kinder, gentler group. So I may join like a League of Conservation
Photos or Sierra Club or I may do something around my local elections or something to do,
you know, to do something around weatherization in my community, something like that, right?
So you may get involved in that. But the question is all of that, like,
how does that then end up with carbon? Yeah, it would be amazing if we could say,
so often folks are presented with a statistic. Oh, if you switch to an electric car,
you'll save this many trees, this many tons of carbon, whatever. And that's supposedly a hard
calculation, even though there's a lot of assumptions and all that and all that within it.
But you could, wouldn't it be wonderful if you could tell people, hey, if you were to join a
local chapter of the sunrise movement in your area and go to one meeting a month,
it would save this many tons of carbon. We could do that. We just need to be able to develop the
models and run them. But those models are, let me just say, like those models are a lot simpler
than the models that are being funded right now to talk about how sandstorms over in Africa are
contributing to hurricanes. And there are people doing that research. And it's important. I am not
saying it's not important. I think everybody should be funded. But I think that, you know,
those of us who are trying to answer these questions, we need to understand that. I mean,
and we need to be able to think about that, right? What is it? So if I were talking to,
like, the general public and you want to do something, is it better for you to support a
candidate who won't take fossil fuel money and is running for office locally in terms of your carbon?
Or is it better for you to get electric school buses into your schools? Or is it better for you
to go and try to get your local school, you know, universities to divest from fossil fuels?
Or is it better for you to throw soup on something and or crazy glue your foot to something and get
a bunch of media attention so that everybody starts, you know, complaining about you, but
talking about the climate crisis, because it absolutely works that way. And I mean, we could
do those things. And I'm hoping, you know, there are a couple of us who actually wrote a piece for
Nature magazine that came out right before the last climate negotiation. So in the fall,
where we basically talked about all the things that we could study and we know a little bit
about, but we need to know so much more about. And unfortunately, so far, we haven't gotten one
dollar to do that work, but we know that work is necessary. Eventually, we will do the work,
but I hope it won't be too late because people need to know now what's the best way to get involved.
But any, but my the take home message of the book is that anything that everybody that anybody is
willing to do is what you should do, because we are in all hands on deck moment, people need to
get involved, they need to get connected, they should do it in their communities. Oh, I mean,
one of the, well, I was going to, like I wish I had said, you know, one of the other things
that we really valuable to do is to like do the modeling to say, if you do something on TikTok
versus you do something in your own community, which what's the carbon there? And you and I
both know how that carbon is going to lay out, right? Because just, you know, the question of how
much posting on TikTok actually leads to reductions in carbon or more consumption could be maybe,
right? Hey, everybody, you know how much I value internet privacy. We have talked about it many
times on this show. And that is why I got to give a big shout out to Surfshark for sponsoring
today's episode. In our digital age, you simply got to be online, but you also don't want anybody
peeking over your shoulder while you're browsing, right? And that is where Surfshark comes in.
Every time you hop online, especially on public networks, you're basically an open book. With
Surfshark, though, your data gets encrypted and your IP address gets masked, keeping hackers
and cyber snoops at bay. Plus, you can virtually change your location with Surfshark's 3200 servers
across 100 countries. That means you can bypass geo-locked content and maintain the comforts
of home and access all your favorite shows, even when you're traveling abroad. Surfshark also
sports a feature called CleanWeb that blocks ads, trackers, malware, and phishing attempts,
making your online experience safer and more serene. Who couldn't use a little extra peace
of mind these days, right? And get this, Surfshark doesn't just keep others out of your business,
they keep themselves out too. They don't monitor, they don't track, and they do not
store your online activity. They use no connection or activity logs of any kind,
just pure peace and privacy. And I am so excited to share that Surfshark has a deal for factually
listeners. Get three months free with a 24-month subscription. Just head over to surfshark.deals
slash Adam Conover or use the code Adam Conover to get started. With a 30-day money-back guarantee,
you've got nothing to lose. Check out surfshark.deals slash Adam Conover or use the code Adam Conover
and start your tranquil era of worry-free browsing right now.
You know, I am all about those little pick-me-ups throughout the day. Whether it's conquering
work tasks or doing chores around the house, I need a little treat to reward me. It is a must.
And you know what gets me smiling every time? Japanese snacks. Not only are they bursting
with flavor, but the cute packaging and quirky vibes add an extra layer of fun. That is why
teaming up with Bokksu, a Japanese snack subscription box, has been an absolute delight.
And these aren't your run-of-the-mill grocery store snacks, okay? Every month, Bokksu brings you
over 20 unique treats that you can normally find only in Japan. Plus, they throw in a nifty guide
packed with info about each snack and Japanese culture. So you get to snack while you learn?
Are you kidding? This was literally made for me. Oh, and by the way, each box ships straight from
Japan straight to your door. Okay, so I'm going to try one of the snacks for you. I got my little
guide right here. I think this week I'm going to go for the Soka Senbei Uma Zorame. This Senbei
rice cracker boasts a uniquely irresistibly tart and sweet flavor combination of Ume Japanese plum
and zorame, a coarse granulated sugar. Cool. Now this says it contains wheat and soy, so that's
good to know for you gluten folks. There are plenty of gluten-free snacks in here. Here's the
cracker. Oh, this looks so good. Let me give it a try. Oh my god. You hear that crunch? It's like
tart. It's a little salty. It's a little sweet. It is delicious. And I never would have gotten to try
this if Bokksu hadn't sent it straight to my house. And you know, my favorite thing about Bokksu is
that they support small, family-run businesses in Japan. Bokksu has sourced your treats by working
with over 245 small makers in Japan, helping out their businesses and helping to preserve
their traditions. So if you love trying new and interesting things, or if you know somebody who
does, you have got to try out Bokksu and get these snacks shipped straight from Japan to your door.
And right now you can use the code FACTUALLY for $15 off your first order on Bokksu.com. That's
code FACTUALLY for $15 off your first order on Bokksu.com. That's B-O-K-K-S-U.com. I want to return
to this point of climate shocks, you said, is going to mobilize people. Because you said, actually,
let's return to something even earlier. And I didn't even, and I didn't finish talking about
what I found. You dropped so many ideas on us. We're going to go through them one by one day.
Because this is, you're an incredible interviewee. So you talked about organizations. Organizations
are really important to get people, you know, mobilized to make things happen. Something I've
talked about before in my work that my wonderful research producer, Sam Roundman, is constantly
reminding me. The reason that NRA is very powerful is not actually the gun lobby's money. It's the
fact that it's a mass, I mean, the lobby, the money is important, right? But is it's a mass
membership organization that like millions of people are members and they actually get something
out of the membership. They take firearms training. They, you know, whatever, they get a discount at
the local gun store. And they make friends. I mean, that's the other thing is it's not just
that they get something out of it, but it creates social bonds and that builds reciprocity so that
if they're like, Hey, the library wants to have this, you know, book, you should do something. Oh,
yeah, I'm going to come out because it's a real membership organization that people feel like
they're a part of. That's also part of why in my own personal experience, unions are so powerful
because it is, it's an organization that actually matters to your life. It's about your workplace.
It's your workplace connections. You can, you know, exercise power and really feel it. It like
is really vital in your life. Churches are really important to people for those reasons.
The social bonds, I think some of the problem with organizations like a 350.org like, Hey,
why don't you join the climate movement and, you know, come to a thing is it's like,
what immediate relevance does that have to people in their lives? Right? Okay. I signed up for a
mailing list. You know, maybe they send me some mailers and stuff like that, but it is lacking
that like immediacy of this is an organization that I am a part of and that it interacts with my
life in multiple ways. So one of the things that I talk about a lot in my last book in American
Resistance is the way that there has been this shift in the past like decade or so as social
media and technology has diffused more, where a lot of organizations decided, particularly on the
left, decided to do the shortcut where they no longer have members, but they have email lists,
right? And as a result, individuals will be, you know, members or connected to many different
organizations simultaneously, because it's a very easy ask, but they don't get anything out of it.
They don't meet in person. They don't actually feel any bonds to anybody else. And I actually in
my last book, I talked about how I am, my sister and I went and volunteered with Swing Left during
the 2018 election. That was like the last chapter of the book where we went out and we decided we
were going to go to, you know, an area in Virginia and we were going to like see, I was like, let's
experience this, how this is working, because this was like a big resistance group they'd
emerge during the Trump administration to try to push back and to try to help take power back.
And so I was like, okay, so my sister and I decided we would do it together. And we went there and
while we ended up meeting Terry McAuliffe, who was the former governor and actually ended up
running for governor, but did not win in Virginia. So we got to meet him and have a conversation with
him. We met nobody else the entire time that we did our work with this organization. And we walked
away having done stuff. I got one email saying, Hey, you guys knocked on this many doors this day.
And it was amazing because it was like, it was, it was crazy because people were like blocking
the street parking to do this in this one area of Virginia to work on this election. But nobody
met anybody. So I felt no contact, no connection to this organization afterwards. There's no
reciprocity there. What if they had at the end of that said, Hey, let's go out for beers. Hey,
the here's Pete, you know, and then you make friends, like, which is something that I've
experienced in the labor movement, right, that, that I have, I have new friends and new colleagues,
right? You know, I'm literally going to go to a labor conference later this year because I want
to meet more people, et cetera, et cetera. I mean, I would say that it's, it's also valuable, like
in a you and people are very connected because it's connected to your work and to your life.
Exactly. And one of the things that a lot of people have asked me out of the new book is I talk about
how we create social reciprocity and how we create resilience in our communities,
which is absolutely necessary, right? And so when we think about climate change, and I know
we're going to talk about climate shocks in a minute, but when we think about climate change,
we know that communities are going to be hit with extreme events, right? Which we call,
which I call climate shocks. But we need to address them in terms of thinking about how we
environmentally prepare, but we also need to socially prepare. And that's where these kinds
of organizations can also play a very important role because as you get hit with an extreme,
like an atmospheric river here or a tornado or a hurricane or a drought or a flood or, you know,
the list goes on and on and on. Unfortunately, the communities are going to have to respond
and having those connections matter a lot. And one of the things that I've been thinking about,
and a lot of people have been asking me is where do we get those connections? Because we have many
fewer of them on the left, which is what you were pointing out originally. And so we, we know
churches, we know other religious groups, we know schools provide that. I mean, certainly
one of the ways that Sunrise was so successful is by building hubs within schools. But another
place, and this is something that I'm actually starting to do research on and work with in my
team at American University, is we're looking at libraries. Libraries are in communities around,
in all communities, right? Everybody has a library or almost everybody has a library,
thankfully. And they provide information and access to books and knowledge, right? And they
could also provide a lot of other things. For example, I mean, I'm assuming here in California,
too, libraries help to distribute COVID test kits, right? And they provided a lot of other
resources. They provide a lot of social services. Exactly. And they could provide even more. And
in fact, one of the things that we're looking into is the way that they might be able to provide
information around climate change that is relevant for specific communities based on what
the demographics or the community are, as well as the kinds of risks that they're facing.
When you talk about these shocks causing, okay, these organizations to grow and maybe
have a closer relationship with the public, which is what we need. We need climate organizations
that people feel connected to in a more real way so that they can actually ask something of people,
hey, show up and do something. And people go, hell, yeah, I will, because I'm a member of this
organization. A climate shock, I can see how that might help that happen. Because if your town is
flooding, it's suddenly realer to you and you need the help of an organization more. Maybe you'll
get more involved in the same way that when if you're being fucked over at work and a union
comes to your workplace, you'll feel like you're a member of that union. That's really real. However,
if the shocks are happening, doesn't that mean it's kind of late?
No, it is a very late hour already for climate change and for the world. And as a result,
there's no question that people are going to lose lives and people are going to lose homes.
I mean, we're already seeing it. I mean, insurance companies are pulling out of parts of
all over the United States. And then that doesn't even consider developing countries which have
contributed the least to the climate crisis, but they're being hit even more and they have much
less social support. Certain small island nations are flooding. Australia is taking in people who
are climate refugees basically. And that's going to happen more and more. But so it is a very late
hour, but it's not too late for most of us to save ourselves. And that's why I start in the
beginning of the book by saying, I hope to see you all on the other side. Because as much as it
sounds kind of glib, I mean, it's absolutely true and we are not taking seriously the threat.
And that's one of the reasons that a lot of climate scientists I know are starting, these are like
the natural scientists, the atmospheric scientists are becoming activists because they're like,
we're done doing research. We're going to scream at the top of our lungs because what the hell else
are we going to do? You guys have to listen to us. But nobody's listening to the dire message
coming from the scientists. But so with regard to climate shocks, what I think is really important
to recognize is that there's a lot of research that talks about how after disasters, windows of
opportunity open. And we can see it after Hurricane Katrina, Hurricane Maria, Hurricane Sandy. I
mean, I know a lot of my examples are hurricanes after the wildfires that hit here in California.
There are these moments where all of a sudden people can do things and policy making shifts
a lot. And this is what I call an anthro shift in the book. And in that moment, what we see is
the social system shift to be able to support people because they know that the people need
the help. And that is when we can see the types of systemic changes that are so needed
actually happening. Unfortunately, at this point, we don't have examples of that kind of lasting
change. And I talk in the book a lot about the example of the pandemic and the way that all of
a sudden, when people started feeling the risk themselves, like the risk, oh my gosh, I could
die. My kids could die. I could pass on this deadly disease to somebody older in my family.
People supported the idea that the world shut down. We stayed home. We homeschooled, which
was really fun. We baked bread. We created gardens. We did all of these things at home.
We stayed inside for a long time. We wore masks. And people got mad after a while, but especially
for the first couple of months, people were really on board. People were vigilant. And our
government changed. It supported us. It gave out more resources. It gave loans. It stopped people
from getting evicted. It did all of these things. That was an anthra shift. But over time, when the
risk level went down and people started being like, oh, I already got it. Wasn't that big deal? Or I
got vaccinated? Or it's not worth this? They went back out and we're basically back to normal.
And I frequently, when I talk about this, and I'm doing my book tour now and I'm talking to
crowds and I'm like, and I see zero people in the audience wearing a mask, even though the pandemic
continues, right? That shows that the shift, we went back. It's multi-directional and we can go
back. And that tells us how bad it has to get before we're really going to mobilize. I mean,
one of the hopeful things just going back to my surveying people in the crowd, back to sociology
for a moment. So I surveyed all of these activists in the streets in New York City, 75,000 people in
September last year. And I asked them for the first time I asked, one, did you experience a
climate shock? And I didn't say climate shock. I listed a whole bunch of things that we know are
climate shocks. Wildfire and smoke from wildfire, extreme weather, extreme events, sea level rise,
flooding, right? And what was amazing is over 85% of the people in the crowd reported experiencing
at least one climate shock in the past six months. Wow. I mean, in a lot of it, so we were on the
East Coast, a lot of it was wildfire and smoke from wildfire, but also sea level rise, flooding,
and extreme heat, right? So this is, I mean, so the people who are mobilizing are experiencing
climate shocks. And the other thing that I asked them is there's been a lot of talk about emotions
and people feeling like climate anxiety or feeling so despondent from the crisis that
they're not doing anything. And so one of the things I wanted to do is see what people in the
streets were feeling, what is motivating them to get out in the streets and get off their sofas,
right? And the top emotions for people in the crowd were sadness, makes sense, right? And anger.
No hope. People in the streets were not particularly hopeful. They were there because
they were pissed off. Yeah. And there is like historical precedent that we know that people
who join social movements and like are willing to take a stand, they usually are angry. So,
you know, come to think of it, hope, especially in the Obama era, got such a big, big reputation.
Oh, hope, hope. That's why we're out there. Well, hold on a second. If you have hope,
maybe you'll just sit at home and be like, yeah, hope things will get better. Like,
things will probably turn around. Exactly.
Don't worry about it. But if you're pissed off, you might take to the streets and like,
you know, start shaking your fist and throwing things.
Absolutely. And you might be willing to glue yourself or get arrested, right? I mean,
a good piece of evidence on that point is that while we did the survey in the streets,
I also worked with a team of folks who did a nationally representative sample of people who
were not in the streets at the same time to see how much they experienced climate shocks
and what emotions they were feeling. And so they had a lot less experience personally with climate
shocks and they were hopeful about the climate change. So people who were not in the streets
are hopeful and less angry and people who are in the streets less hopeful, angry, but they're there.
That is so fascinating because I have taken as a thesis for a long time that, look, there's such
a vibe out there of the world is ending, right? It's all over. If you scroll on TikTok, you'll
see a lot of people who feel that way. Well, hey, this is the, I'm a member of the last generation.
So why even bother? And I always sort of took it as a given that part of, you know,
what I should try to do is let people know that there's always going to be a world tomorrow
and you always have the opportunity to make a better tomorrow and shit is being done and you
can be a part of that and to try to fight against defeatism, which I think is part of hope and to
try to cultivate a bit of hope. Things are really bad. I want us to be real realists, but hey,
if we can do it, what you are maybe saying is that maybe that's the wrong approach. Maybe we
should just say, nah, shit's fucked. Get mad. Get out there. I don't think that they're that
different. I mean, I actually, because I actually think when I hear you talking about it, I mean,
like you kind of sound like an apocalyptic optimist too, right? I mean, I mean, it's basically,
that's the realistic stance, right? Is that, I mean, if you want to be realistic about the climate
crisis, you need to acknowledge what the natural scientists are saying. I mean, I'm not a natural
scientist. I'm not an atmospheric scientist. We got a lot of my colleagues who are who are saying,
we are standing at the precipice and we are looking into it. And some of us are saying,
who cares? And others of us are saying, holy shit, I mean, and those people are doing something
about it. And in, you know, in the case of the general public, I think it's important to recognize
that so that when we hit like summer 2024 is going to suck. It is going to suck across the
country. And anybody who says differently, and then it's going to go into fall 2024,
and they are predicting the worst hurricane, the worst hurricane season ever. I mean, and the
only, I mean, if anybody is wondering about why we know that, look at the temperature, ocean
temperatures now, ocean temperatures are statistically significantly off the charts
from any historical record. And that, and that leads to hurricanes, right?
Because the energy in the ocean, that leads to energy in the storm system.
Yeah. I mean, basically the storms like suck up the water and the warmer the water is,
the more water they suck up. And so while the hurricanes, the wind may not be any stronger,
it is not the wind that destroys homes and destroys communities. It is how much rain falls.
I mean, you guys know that here, right? It's all about rainfall and how much
your land can actually absorb, right? And that, and that is going to be
absolutely decimating this coming year. So we need to be realistic about that, right? And I,
I mean, I don't do that research, but I believe my colleagues who do do that research.
And so the question is, what do we do about it? And I do think we should be hopeful. I mean,
I'm hopeful, but the reason I'm hopeful is because I'm angry. And because I know so many people are
angry. And I think that people should not sit with it and be like, you know, you should be like,
wow, this sucks. And it's getting worse. But they, but we should also think,
and fuck it, I'm going to do something about it. And, and that's what everybody needs to do.
People need to rise up and they need to, they need to embrace the anchor and embrace the fact that
this is not fair. And it is not fair that it is our responsibility to do something about it. The
only way that our government will do what is needed is if we demand it and we force them to.
Otherwise, we will continue on this incremental path to policy making that will do something,
but absolutely not enough to address the climate crisis. And basically, you may as well kiss like
half of Florida goodbye. You may as well kiss most of the coast, you know, goodbye. And anybody who
lives in areas that get extreme heat, like, you know, the whole Southwest, anybody who works
outside there, anybody who can't afford to have air conditioning, they'll be moving. And, you know,
then we're going to be experiencing not just internal migration, but, you know, within the
United States, but we're going to be seeing all these people from other parts of the world who
can't, you know, can't live where they are, who have, you know, no access to water. It's too hot.
They can't survive. And they're going to be pushing in. And of course, that makes for a really fun
story because, as we know, we're not doing so well with migration already. Now imagine all the
people who are going to be coming. And the political strife that will come as a result
when people freak out about that and the humanitarian crisis that will happen. And my God.
But don't get despondent. Get angry. That's a great message. I, I, no, no, seriously,
I'm the angry sociologist. That's a wonderful, it's a wonderful message and a wonderful speech
that you gave. I hope you could speak to my own darkest thought, which is that, you know, on some
level humanity, like our social technology, our social ability to recognize what's happening as a
system of humans. And honestly, our individual ability to do so is sort of outstripped by what is
happening. You know, I, something that stuck with me for a long time, I read this maybe a year ago.
Can't remember whose blog post this was. So apologies to the blogger who wrote this,
but it was that, you know, Obama had bought a beachfront home on Martha's, Martha's Village.
Martha's Vineyard. Martha's Vineyard. Thank you, the island, right? That he loves so much.
You are a west coaster. No, no, no, I'm not a prop. No, I grew up in New York, goddammit,
but I just forgot what it was. Oh, I have a tan now. Okay, fuck it. I mean, I live in California.
Anyway, so he had bought a, he had bought a house on Martha's Vineyard and whatever
reporter or blogger this was looked up like, you know, the government's climate change predictions.
It was like, this house is going to be unlivable or unsellable inside of 20 years, right? That this
is like a terrible investment. Forget livable. It's a bad investment. And literally, I know people,
I grew up on Long Island, I know people who have had that problem where it's like their house has
gone down in value because, you know, it's so close to the coast that people don't want to buy it
because they know about climate change. After Hurricane Sandy, there were communities that had
to be relocated. I mean, yeah. So the point of this piece was that Barack Obama, who certainly
should be in a better position than anyone else to know about climate change, very smart man reads
a giant briefing book every weekend, you know, he's not ignorant of the problem. And yet when it came
to his own personal choice, he made a choice that was ignorant because our own ability to sort of
see the future in this case and think about how it affects us is limited, right? It's like a human
limitation. And I could list, I don't want to just be like, Obama's a piece of shit. That's not the
point. The point is that like all of us do this to an extent, right? Like we have trouble
thinking about the future in this way and making adjustments in our lives and then multiply that
by, you know, eight billion. And, you know, you've got a real motherfucker of a problem. And this is
just going to be something we're 200 years from now. The remnants of humanity are looking back
going. This was just outstripped our ability to do something as a species.
Okay. So first and foremost, yes, I think there is a real risk of that. But second, I do want to,
I want to talk about the Obama issue and the example for a second to just say that, well,
well, Obama should have known better. However, he is, I mean, he's a super privileged man, right?
He's a former president of the United States. He has lots of resources. His, you know,
Michelle has made a lot of money on selling books, right? So they are not suffering at all. Okay.
So they can afford it. I mean, the people who can afford it, I mean, they may take a loss.
They can afford to take a loss. And at this point, I mean, it's unclear what will happen with insurance
on Martha's Vineyard and in, you know, in Massachusetts. If they were in Florida,
they would no longer have insurance. And you know what? Someone's going to buy this house,
even if it's like floating in the ocean. Someone's going to be like, you know,
President Obama used to live there. Someone's going to pay too much for it.
I mean, what maybe, but I mean, what's happening right now is that there are certain communities
and there was this really interesting story that was done in Washington Post recently about
communities in the Outer Banks of North Carolina, where there were the summer houses that basically
had, you know, where Outer Banks are like these border islands, right? And they had been
so taken over by sea level rise that they basically were no longer able to get access to
water, sewage or electricity, right? Because that all came underground and all got washed away.
So the National Park Service paid the owners, and I believe it was $800,000 a house
to take them back and demolish them. Wow.
Which is, that's just like, that's not sustainable. It's outrageous a little bit. And you know,
and those people like, I know they took a loss, but you know, hey, that's not so bad. I mean,
we should all hope that we get that kind of bailout. That's not, we should not expect that to
happen. But so, I mean, so I would just say like, I think, you know, those people who can afford
summer homes and stuff like that, and I mean, more and more, they're going to buy homes without
being able to get insurance because that's what's happening is the insurance companies are on the
forefront or the Vanguard in terms of thinking about this because it's their pocketbook that's
going back to cover. And the people in that position of privilege are the ones who are calling the
shots. They're the ones who are running the oil companies. They're the ones who are senators and
et cetera, right? Right. I mean, for now, I mean, the nice, you know, that's one of the things that's
nice about our country is you could actually run for office and hold office and not come from like
oil companies. But you know, people have to, but it's much more difficult. I saw a stat recently
from, I believe, more Perfect Union that like a very small percentage of people in office are from
working class backgrounds. Most of them are well paid lawyers and things like that. They're from
the upper crust. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So let me share. So those, I mean, and those people are
going to have the least, they're the least at risk from the climate crisis, right? They are not part
of frontline communities. They are not, most of them don't come from communities of color either.
And that means that they have like some distance from experiencing this. But I mean, but I think
that the other point that you made in this, the example around Obama that I think is really important
to think about is that because of the way climate change works, which is right right now, we emit
CO2, carbon greenhouse gases, they go into the atmosphere and they build up there.
And it is the process of them getting up there and sitting up there that then affects
thermal radiation coming from the sun and how much actually gets back out. And that's,
that's the greenhouse effect, right? That's how it works. And that then has this effect on all
these patterns, et cetera, that the natural scientists are talking about. It is a slow process,
right? We know, for example, if tomorrow everybody stopped burning fossil fuels and
everybody, you know, everybody just turned off the lights, we would not see an effect in terms of
all of the effects of climate change. The climate shocks would not stop immediately.
So given that delay, it makes it even harder. Not only is that we've got these folks in positions
of power who are controlling all the resources that are making decisions, making slow, but it's
also that it's like a, it's, there's a delay there. And that means that this is such a tricky problem
that there is just no question in my mind that we are going to have to get a lot more apocalyptic
before we're going to get to the optimistic side. Because we need people to experience this first
hand to get angry enough to make those kinds of decisions to change their behaviors. And a lot
of those decisions and those changes, they're not going to be fun. I mean, some people will be able
to buy a Rivian. Congratulations to you, right? But most people were talking about having to
take public transit and hope that it becomes electrified. And that is, you know, having tried,
right, like, you know, having tried to get around on public transit here in LA, I can tell you,
it sucks. I do it every day. Oh, well, it's, it's, look, if you, if you plan it that way, right,
you plan it that way. I plan it that way. I've, I've molded my life around public transit in LA
and go to, go to a major city in Texas and tell me that public transit in LA sucks. Like, at least
we fucking have it here. I'm, I'm serious. Like, like Los Angeles has second highest public transit
ridership in the country, because, because there are buses, a lot of cities in America do not have
them at all. But, you know, I saw speed. I know about the buses. Well taken that like you, it is,
the system is simultaneously, you know, to, to spread out buses run too rarely, too uncomfortable,
not enough shade, speaking of climate change, you know, there are all these problems with the
system. And they're not electric. Yeah. And they're not electric. Makes it far more uncomfortable
and unpleasant and inconvenient to ride than it should be, despite the fact that it's a better
option than many, than many people, you know, in this city think that it is. But so you, but it
almost seems like you end up not rooting for the shocks, but saying like, Hey, things are going to
get worse. But in a way, that's a good thing because it may finally cause the societal response
that we need, where people are really fucking getting out there and getting angry and saying,
protect us because we are actively dying. Right. I mean, and that, but that unfortunately, that
process is the only way I see it working. Right. Because the government's not going to step in
and save us because they're basically going to lose, I mean, the folks in power are going to lose
those funders who fund their campaigns. And that's how our political system works, unfortunately.
But that is how the system works, right? So that's not going to change. The business is,
some of the businesses are going to push for clean energy, but a whole bunch of businesses
are going to say, Hey, we can, maybe we can extract a more natural gas and send it to other
countries and make money on that. So they're going to do anything they can to stay, stay the
course. So systemic change is hard. We're going to have to push for it. And it is true that we're
going to need to have, I mean, I'm not rooting for climate shocks. I am being just realistic
about what's coming. I mean, I just hope there are some people, some scholars who are talking
about these like cascading effects and not knowing how it's going to have huge effects on
in terms of thinking about how weather patterns will change, how the different ocean currents
will change. And I mean, this is all people who do stuff that I do not do and I don't know a lot
about, but I read when I see the story, the pieces come out in top journals, those things could really
change the whole way that weather and temperature and climate works all over the world. And we don't
know. I mean, it could mean like droughts happen in places that never were dry before and floods,
you know, and places are inundated in ways that were never before. But we should expect that
these kinds of things are coming. So I just, my feeling is we just should take whatever is
predicted and assume that it could be as bad as that. And we can hope it won't be. But that is
where people are going to start to get angry because it's when you have the personal experience
of the risk that gets us mad and gets us motivated. And then we work through the organizations that
exist or build our own organizations to put pressure on those in power. And it's only when
those in power actually feel at risk of losing power that they finally make a difference.
And they make the changes that are needed. And that means we learn this from the civil
rights movement. Those are perfect examples there. I mean, you actually are giving me hope that
it's weird. You give me a weird kind of hope that like as things get worse, that creates the
conditions for things to get better, that there's a natural sort of countervailing force. And that
honestly sounds more plausible to me than like, Hey, you know, the price of solar is going to get
so cheap that eventually the problem is going to solve itself. Like I can, I can hold that a
little bit of hope there too. But also, you know, I think things are getting a little bit worse.
But the idea that that is going to, you know, cause change and cause a mass uprising of the
sort that we need is believable. And it seems to be, you know, born out by history that, you know,
it's when people are under the most intense pressure that I mean, look at the labor movement,
right? That like the labor movement was born out of the incredible depravity of the late 19th
century, right? The incredible misery forced people to stand up and fight back. And then,
you know, we, the labor movement worked and, you know, in, you know, starting in the middle
part of the century or the last century, we had the rise of the middle class and like safety
protections and the 40 hour work week and all these things. And then everybody got comfy and
the company started fucking everybody again. And now people are rising up again. Like this is
kind of how it works a little bit. And so, you know, we're starting to have the fact that the
climate crisis is actually happening, is waking people up perhaps.
Well, yeah, certainly. I mean, there's no question that the labor movement is also
reemerging after recognizing how the extension and expansion of inequality in our country is
basically leaving so many people behind, right? So that's happening simultaneous.
And one of the things that simultaneously, one of the things I talk about in the book, though,
is that historically, labor and the climate movement have not worked well together. I mean,
and in fact, part of that is because much of the clean energy transition so far has been
peopled by non-union labor. And that means that folks in unions are like, no, no, no, no, no,
we would like to stick with our fossil fuel expansion project because that is unionized.
And there have been some, I won't, I won't call them out, but there's been a couple
unions I know here in Southern California that have been like against, you know,
different climate change regulations. Hey, let's electrify. Well, hold on a second.
If you work in the gas industry, maybe you don't like that so much.
Of course. Of course. And that's understandable, but it is, you know, it is against, it's people
following their incentives as one does, but it is bad in the overall.
The good news is things are shifting. I mean, for example, there was one,
there's one really interesting case that happened recently where so for people who build cars that
are fossil fuel burning cars, most of those factories are union labor, right?
Yeah.
The folks who build the batteries for electric cars historically have not been union labor.
And so if you want to push for more EVs, you're pushing away from using union labor.
But there is, there are now efforts and there's some really good people who are working on trying
to, you know, work together to unionize consistently so that that is not, you know,
that is not the challenge of the worker because it's not really fair.
And because that is really necessary to help to merge these movements together.
And a far-sighted union leader would need to see that as I think some in the auto industry are
finally. Yeah, they're finally starting to do that. And I think that's going to continue. I mean,
I would just say that, you know, the other reason that we don't, we shouldn't have a lot of hope
so far about the clean energy transition is that so far we've seen an expansion in consumption
of clean energy in the United States, thanks to a lot of federal funding from the Inflation
Reduction Act, et cetera. And the price of, you know, renewable and clean energy has gone down
quite a bit. But what's happened is actually our overall energy to consumption has just grown.
Yeah.
So we continue to still burn and consume as much fossil fuels, but more, there's more.
The percentage is better, but the actual, a literal amount of fossil fuels being burned has
not gone down. And that's why the carbon concentrations continue to go up.
So you said earlier, it was almost a good way to end the podcast, but I had more I wanted to ask
you. You remember before when you were like, get angry and get out there, right? How should people
do that? Like how should people, you know, join the movement if we would like to make sure we don't
need quite so many climate shocks before we do something, right? We want to get started early
so that we have to go through less of those. What do people do?
Yeah, that's exactly the argument that I make is that the more people reclaim their power and
mobilize and start working together, the less climate shocks will happen and the less people
will lose life and lose like their livelihoods, right? Because that's basically where we're going.
So, I mean, the book ends with three points, three things that we can all do to save ourselves.
And two of them are for people who want to be activists. And one is for, you know,
your everyday people. So I'll just talk to the activists first. I'm first and foremost,
and this is actually building off of what we were just talking about. Activists need to create
community and true solidarity. And the solidarity needs to come across movements, across different
issues. I mean, we need to see more intersectionality. We need to see more people coming from all
different identities and orientations engaging in climate activism. Historically, the climate
movement which spun off of the environmental movement was really quite privileged. And as such,
we did not see a lot of people of color or people coming from working class backgrounds
involved in it. We still don't enough, but we need to see that happen more. And one of the things
in terms of thinking about creating community and building community within the movement,
I think is really interesting, is I talk about in the book a lot lessons from the civil rights
movement. And one of the things, and I talk a lot in the book about kind of this growing radical
flank of folks who are starting to be more aggressive, even though it's like air quote
aggressive at this point, in that they're being confrontational, throwing soup on plastic covers
and, you know, gluing themselves to things or disrupting the US Open and then getting
carted away in the US Open continues, right? So I mean, sure, it's a nuisance, but we're
not talking like this isn't radical like the suffragettes who blew up like a building a month
the height of women's suffrage, you know, the struggle for women's suffrage. So,
you know, it's still quite tame radical. But when we talk about the radical flank, like everybody
doesn't have to be involved in the radical flank. When we think about creating community, one of
the things that's a really interesting lesson from the civil rights movement is that during the
civil rights struggle, a radical flank also emerged, right, where people were becoming more
confrontational and they engaged in sit-ins and they engaged in, you know, the blockades and,
you know, it continues from there. Everybody probably knows some of the stories about that.
But what's very interesting about it is that the, as a radical flank, which was mostly young
people during the civil rights period, emerged, a lot of the elders who were active in the movement
were not happy with this. These young people who were starting to be more radical, breaking laws,
they were, you know, risking themselves also because, you know, there was a lot of racism
in our country. Even then there was racism, right? Let me say that differently. Back then,
there was racism, but it's worth noting that, you know, racism continues today in our country.
But so even though the elders were not happy with this, the Black churches created a home for
these activists and created a space for them to organize and created resources to bail people
out of jail, et cetera. And it is that kind of community that created support and this kind
of organizational infrastructure for activists, no matter whether they were being, you know,
doing more legally oriented work and focusing on trying to get the vote through institutional
channels or they were out in the streets causing, you know, good trouble, right?
That's what people call a diversity of tactics, right? And there was solidarity between all the
people who were pursuing the, hey, I don't know if I like you, what you were doing, but you know
what? I'll bail you out of jail or I'll make sure we're on the same side still.
They were on the same side. I mean, they were still like the solidarity was, there was solidarity,
but they argued. I mean, certainly, and there were factions and they didn't agree all the time.
And, you know, and they didn't, you know, everybody had their opinion, right? So it was,
it was an uncomfortable coalition to some degree, but it was also all rooted in the Black community
and within the Black churches. And so they really had a lot more organizational infrastructure
than the groups do today. And as we were talking about, that is really necessary and important.
So building that through community and solidarity is valuable. That was number one.
Number two is taking advantage of moral shocks and capitalizing on violence against activists.
And this is really, we haven't talked that much about civil disobedience.
Civil disobedience is becoming a more common tactic among activists. I mean,
well, I'm going to just say like everybody has heard of Greta Thunberg and Greta just got arrested
again in the Netherlands last week. She is a perfect example. And I talk about her quite a bit
in the book because she started out doing this very kind of very, you know, simple tactic where
she was just sitting on the parliament steps, right, holding her sign and skipping school,
right? It was not confrontational. And she has become increasingly confrontational and she has
basically become part of the radical flank of the climate movement. So her personal trajectory is
like a really good example because we're seeing that for activists around the country and around
the world, right? But what's interesting is that many people then say, oh, these activists,
they're going to get violent. There's very little reason to believe they're going to get violent.
What is much more likely, and I talk at length about this in the book, is that people are going
to get violent against them. They are going to be repressed by law enforcement. I mean,
we're seeing that, we're seeing a little bit of that in the United States. We're seeing that more
and more around the world. But we also should expect that there are going to be counter movements
that will rise up and be aggressive and violent against the activists. And it is an unfortunate
reality. But it happened during the George Floyd movement, right? Exactly. Where you had the police
violently attacking protesters and then you had vigilantes showing up with guns and shooting people
and saying, oh, that's because the protesters are violent. Exactly. So that is, that's a
wonderful example. I mean, the other thing worth noting here is, and I talk in the book about
the moment when President Trump basically had all of these peaceful protesters tear gassed in
Lafayette Square in Washington, D.C., for his photo opportunity. But the thing is that,
and this is a perfect example of how activists can capitalize on violence, is that these were
nonviolent protesters and members of the media who got tear gassed and they were, you know,
they were harmed physically and they drew attention to this. And the protests the next day was like
twice the size. Yeah. And that is how it works, capitalizing on these moral shocks and the violence.
I mean, and there are other examples from the civil rights movement where we saw, you know,
dogs called on activists, people beaten up, et cetera. And so for that just list goes on.
Those are the iconic moments of that movement. Exactly. And those were the moments when people
who were sympathizers to the movement mobilized in solidarity. And it is those moments of solidarity.
I mean, George Floyd, the moment when we saw the protests after George Floyd was murdered
were moments of solidarity. And one of the reasons we saw so many people, white people
in the crowd and people who were coming out because of their intersectional motivations
is because they were not willing to sit down after observing and witnessing an unarmed black
man being murdered by a policeman on social media, right? So that was like a moral shock
that motivated people and they got angry, right? Yeah. But so that's number two and number three.
And finally, and this is for people who don't want to do activism. You do not have to be an
activist to help us save ourselves, right? You can be just an everyday citizen. And that's the
final one, which is about cultivating resilience. And as I said before, when I talk about resilience,
this is about building our communities so that they can withstand the climate shocks that are
coming and come they will, right? So we know they're coming. And depending on where you live,
you know what you're in for, whether it is extreme heat or extreme weather, atmospheric rivers,
tornadoes, etc. When those things hit, first of all, we need to rebuild in ways that we can handle
that more because we know they're going to keep coming. Places that experience sea level rise,
you need to make sure that your community is capable of handling flooding, the kind of flooding
that's going to become regular. I mean, and hopefully the flooding that will not overpower
your community. But still, there are things you can do. So you need to be environmentally resilient,
but more importantly, I would say, we need to be socially resilient. I mean, I've been talking
with a lot of groups that are working on disasters and they keep telling me about how
what they basically have been funded to do mostly is what they call disaster response.
And that is like the number one thing that a disaster response is, is it's mucking and gutting,
which is really, really not glamorous work at all, right? Mucking and gutting out after floods,
after fires, etc. That is the response. But the problem is that you need to also think about the
recovery, right? And recovery is rebuilding in a way where your community is more resilient. And
when you do that, you really need people to be connected to one another so that those who get
on house have support. Those who need food, those who need resources, etc., those who need jobs because
their place of work no longer exists because it gets just washed away or burnt down.
And so the resilience is really important. And that's something that we can all do by getting
more connected and embedded in our communities, be it through our local unions, be it through our,
you know, whatever religious groups there are or our schools or our libraries, right?
I mean, I love it. It's such a holistic vision of like how we can
save ourselves, save ourselves the title of your book. I mean, it's a huge task,
but it's like, that's all, all we can fucking do is to, is to do this. Like we have to do it.
We have to do it. We will do it. I mean, like I'm an optimist, right? We will do it. The question is
how bad is it going to get before we do it. And hopefully it won't be too late for most of us.
I mean, I really believe, I believe in people power. I believe we can do it, but I believe we
need to all embrace the anger and get involved. I mean, people power got us here, right? Literally
fossil fuels are people power. It's a kind of power that we fucking came up with. We created the
problem. We have the power to fix it. We are the only ones who are going to fix it. And we're the,
you know, that kind of, the kind of power you're talking about is the only kind of power that's
ever done fucking anything. Yeah. I mean, and as, as I say, the last line of the book is actually,
as unfair as it seems, nobody's coming to save us. We're going to have to save ourselves.
And so this is, this is the opportunity, but this is the moment now where it still can really matter.
Yeah. It will matter in the end, but it'll matter more now. So.
And that's such an opportunity. I mean, look, I, I'm as angry as anybody. I can't believe we have
to fuck, you know, Greta Thunberg going like, I'm a child. I'm a child. Like, yeah, no, we get it.
But yet, you know, this is the position that we are in, and we can see it as an opportunity to
have a huge effect on the world around us by, by stepping up and doing these things.
Absolutely. I mean, one final thing I would just say is that, you know, there are lots of young
people who are just angry and upset and, you know, I feel the same way that Greta did. And she did
that night, that iconic speech, right? One thing that I think is really nice to see though, is that
we see all of these, what we're calling them, like the climate elders, the climate grannies
who are coming out and are basically setting an example and are providing support for young
people and working in, you know, working with them in, you know, solidarity. We've got the,
like, rocking chair rebellion. We've got all of these amazing elders who are also joining the
movement. So it's not all on young people. And I think we just need to, you know, support everybody
who is doing everything they can to save ourselves because it's going to take all of us.
Dana, thank you so much for being here. It's been incredible to have you on the show.
Thank you for having me. This is such a great conversation.
Well, thank you once again to Dr. Dana Fisher for coming on the show. If you want to pick up a
copy of her wonderful book, you can do so at factuallypod.com slash books. That's factuallypod.com
slash books. And when you buy a book there, you'll support not just this show, but your local bookstore
as well. I also want to thank everybody who supports the show on Patreon. Head to patreon.com
slash Adam Conover. $5 a month gets you every episode of the show ad free for $15 a month.
I will read your name at the end of this podcast and put it in the credits of every
single one of my video monologues. This week, I want to thank Kevin Sosa, Josh Brio,
and Mask When You Can Protect Your Community. Thank you so much for your support of the show.
Again, if you want to see me do stand up comedy, head to adamconover.net for all my tickets and
tour dates. I want to thank my producers, Sam Radman and Tony Wilson, everybody here at Head
Gum for making the show possible. Thank you so much for listening and we'll see you next
time on Factually. That was a Head Gum podcast.